The Project Gutenberg EBook of Les Miserables, by Victor Hugo

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Les Miserables
       Complete in Five Volumes

Author: Victor Hugo

Translator: Isabel F. Hapgood

Release Date: June 22, 2008 [EBook #135]
Last Updated: October 30, 2009

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LES MISERABLES ***




Produced by Judith Boss





LES MISERABLES

By Victor Hugo


Translated by Isabel F. Hapgood

Thomas Y. Crowell & Co.
No. 13, Astor Place
New York

Copyright 1887

[Illustration: Bookshelf  1spines]

[Illustration: Bookcover  1cover]

[Illustration: Frontpapers 1frontpapers]

[Illustration: Frontispiece 1frontispiece]

[Illustration: Titlepage Volume One 1titlepage]

[Illustration: Titlepage Verso  1verso]




CONTENTS


     VOLUME I

     BOOK FIRST.--A JUST MAN

     CHAPTER
         I.  M. Myriel
        II.  M. Myriel becomes M. Welcome
       III.  A Hard Bishopric for a Good Bishop
        IV.  Works corresponding to Words
         V.  Monseigneur Bienvenu made his Cassocks last too long
        VI.  Who guarded his House for him
       VII.  Cravatte
      VIII.  Philosophy after Drinking
        IX.  The Brother as depicted by the Sister
         X.  The Bishop in the Presence of an Unknown Light
        XI.  A Restriction
       XII.  The Solitude of Monseigneur Welcome
      XIII.  What he believed
       XIV.  What he thought

     BOOK SECOND.--THE FALL

         I.  The Evening of a Day of Walking
        II.  Prudence counselled to Wisdom
       III.  The Heroism of Passive Obedience
        IV.  Details concerning the Cheese-Dairies of Pontarlier
         V.  Tranquillity
        VI.  Jean Valjean
       VII.  The Interior of Despair
      VIII.  Billows and Shadows
        IX.  New Troubles
         X.  The Man aroused
        XI.  What he does
       XII.  The Bishop works
      XIII.  Little Gervais

     BOOK THIRD.--IN THE YEAR 1817

         I.  The Year 1817
        II.  A Double Quartette
       III.  Four and Four
        IV.  Tholomyes is so Merry that he sings a Spanish Ditty
         V.  At Bombardas
        VI.  A Chapter in which they adore Each Other
       VII.  The Wisdom of Tholomyes
      VIII.  The Death of a Horse
        IX.  A Merry End to Mirth

     BOOK FOURTH.--TO CONFIDE IS SOMETIMES TO DELIVER INTO A PERSON'S POWER

         I.  One Mother meets Another Mother
        II.  First Sketch of Two Unprepossessing Figures
       III.  The Lark

     BOOK FIFTH.--THE DESCENT

         I.  The History of a Progress in Black Glass Trinkets
        II.  Madeleine
       III.  Sums deposited with Laffitte
        IV.  M. Madeleine in Mourning
         V.  Vague Flashes on the Horizon
        VI.  Father Fauchelevent
       VII.  Fauchelevent becomes a Gardener in Paris
      VIII.  Madame Victurnien expends Thirty Francs on Morality
        IX.  Madame Victurnien's Success
         X.  Result of the Success
        XI.  Christus nos Liberavit
       XII.  M. Bamatabois's Inactivity
      XIII.  The Solution of Some Questions connected with the
                 Municipal Police

     BOOK SIXTH.--JAVERT

         I.  The Beginning of Repose
        II.  How Jean may become Champ

     BOOK SEVENTH.--THE CHAMPMATHIEU AFFAIR

         I.  Sister Simplice
        II.  The Perspicacity of Master Scaufflaire
       III.  A Tempest in a Skull
        IV.  Forms assumed by Suffering during Sleep
         V.  Hindrances
        VI.  Sister Simplice put to the Proof
       VII.  The Traveller on his Arrival takes Precautions
                 for Departure
      VIII.  An Entrance by Favor
        IX.  A Place where Convictions are in Process of Formation
         X.  The System of Denials
        XI.  Champmathieu more and more Astonished

     BOOK EIGHTH.--A COUNTER-BLOW

         I.  In what Mirror M. Madeleine contemplates his Hair
        II.  Fantine Happy
       III.  Javert Satisfied
        IV.  Authority reasserts its Rights
         V.  A Suitable Tomb



     VOLUME II

     BOOK FIRST.--WATERLOO

     CHAPTER
         I.  What is met with on the Way from Nivelles
        II.  Hougomont
       III.  The Eighteenth of June, 1815
        IV.  A
         V.  The Quid Obscurum of Battles
        VI.  Four o'clock in the Afternoon
       VII.  Napoleon in a Good Humor
      VIII.  The Emperor puts a Question to the Guide Lacoste
        IX.  The Unexpected
         X.  The Plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean
        XI.  A Bad Guide to Napoleon; a Good Guide to Bulow
       XII.  The Guard
      XIII.  The Catastrophe
       XIV.  The Last Square
        XV.  Cambronne
       XVI.  Quot Libras in Duce?
      XVII.  Is Waterloo to be considered Good?
     XVIII.  A Recrudescence of Divine Right
       XIX.  The Battle-Field at Night

     BOOK SECOND.--THE SHIP ORION

         I.  Number 24,601 becomes Number 9,430
        II.  In which the reader will peruse Two Verses which are
               of the Devil's Composition possibly
       III.  The Ankle-Chain must have undergone a Certain Preparatory
             Manipulation to be thus broken with a Blow from a Hammer

     BOOK THIRD.--ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROMISE MADE TO THE DEAD WOMAN

         I.  The Water Question at Montfermeil
        II.  Two Complete Portraits
       III.  Men must have Wine, and Horses must have Water
        IV.  Entrance on the Scene of a Doll
         V.  The Little One All Alone
        VI.  Which possibly proves Boulatruelle's Intelligence
       VII.  Cosette Side by Side with the Stranger in the Dark
      VIII.  The Unpleasantness of receiving into One's House a Poor
               Man who may be a Rich Man
        IX.  Thenardier at his Manoeuvres
         X.  He who seeks to better himself may render his Situation Worse
        XI.  Number 9,430 reappears, and Cosette wins it in the Lottery

     BOOK FOURTH.--THE GORBEAU HOVEL

         I.  Master Gorbeau
        II.  A Nest for Owl and a Warbler
       III.  Two Misfortunes make One Piece of Good Fortune
        IV.  The Remarks of the Principal Tenant
         V.  A Five-Franc Piece falls on the Ground and produces a Tumult

     BOOK FIFTH.--FOR A BLACK HUNT, A MUTE PACK

         I.  The Zigzags of Strategy
        II.  It is Lucky that the Pont d'Austerlitz bears
               Carriages
       III.  To Wit, the Plan of Paris in 1727
        IV.  The Gropings of Flight
         V.  Which would be Impossible with Gas Lanterns
        VI.  The Beginning of an Enigma
       VII.  Continuation of the Enigma
      VIII.  The Enigma becomes Doubly Mysterious
        IX.  The Man with the Bell
         X.  Which explains how Javert got on the Scent

     BOOK SIXTH.--LE PETIT-PICPUS

         I.  Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus
        II.  The Obedience of Martin Verga
       III.  Austerities
        IV.  Gayeties
         V.  Distractions
        VI.  The Little Convent
       VII.  Some Silhouettes of this Darkness
      VIII.  Post Corda Lapides
        IX.  A Century under a Guimpe
         X.  Origin of the Perpetual Adoration
        XI.  End of the Petit-Picpus

     BOOK SEVENTH.--PARENTHESIS

         I.  The Convent as an Abstract Idea
        II.  The Convent as an Historical Fact
       III.  On What Conditions One can respect the Past
        IV.  The Convent from the Point of View of Principles
         V.  Prayer
        VI.  The Absolute Goodness of Prayer
       VII.  Precautions to be observed in Blame
      VIII.  Faith, Law

     BOOK EIGHTH.--CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM

         I.  Which treats of the Manner of entering a Convent
        II.  Fauchelevent in the Presence of a Difficulty
       III.  Mother Innocente
        IV.  In which Jean Valjean has quite the Air of having read
               Austin Castillejo
         V.  It is not Necessary to be Drunk in order to be Immortal
        VI.  Between Four Planks
       VII.  In which will be found the Origin of the Saying: Don't
               lose the Card
      VIII.  A Successful Interrogatory
        IX.  Cloistered


     VOLUME III

     BOOK FIRST.--PARIS STUDIED IN ITS ATOM

          I.  Parvulus
         II.  Some of his Particular Characteristics
        III.  He is Agreeable
         IV.  He may be of Use
          V.  His Frontiers
         VI.  A Bit of History
        VII.  The Gamin should have his Place in the Classifications
                 of India
       VIII.  In which the Reader will find a Charming Saying of the
                 Last King
         IX.  The Old Soul of Gaul
          X.  Ecce Paris, ecce Homo
         XI.  To Scoff, to Reign
        XII.  The Future Latent in the People
       XIII.  Little Gavroche

     BOOK SECOND.--THE GREAT BOURGEOIS

          I.  Ninety Years and Thirty-two Teeth
         II.  Like Master, Like House
        III.  Luc-Esprit
         IV.  A Centenarian Aspirant
          V.  Basque and Nicolette
         VI.  In which Magnon and her Two Children are seen
        VII.  Rule: Receive No One except in the Evening
       VIII.  Two do not make a Pair

     BOOK THIRD.--THE  GRANDFATHER AND THE GRANDSON

          I.  An Ancient Salon
         II.  One of the Red Spectres of that Epoch
        III.  Requiescant
         IV.  End of the Brigand
          V.  The Utility of going to Mass, in order to become a
                 Revolutionist
         VI.  The Consequences of having met a Warden
        VII.  Some Petticoat
       VIII.  Marble against Granite

     BOOK FOURTH.--THE FRIENDS OF THE ABC

          I.  A Group which barely missed becoming Historic
         II.  Blondeau's Funeral Oration by Bossuet
        III.  Marius' Astonishments
         IV.  The Back Room of the Cafe Musain
          V.  Enlargement of Horizon
         VI.  Res Angusta

     BOOK FIFTH.--THE EXCELLENCE OF MISFORTUNE

          I.  Marius Indigent
         II.  Marius Poor
        III.  Marius Grown Up
         IV.  M. Mabeuf
          V.  Poverty a Good Neighbor for Misery
         VI.  The Substitute

     BOOK SIXTH.--THE CONJUNCTION OF TWO STARS

          I.  The Sobriquet; Mode of Formation of Family Names
         II.  Lux Facta Est
        III.  Effect of the Spring
         IV.  Beginning of a Great Malady
          V.  Divers Claps of Thunder fall on Ma'am Bougon
         VI.  Taken Prisoner
        VII.  Adventures of the Letter U delivered over to Conjectures
       VIII.  The Veterans themselves can be Happy
         IX.  Eclipse

     BOOK SEVENTH.--PATRON MINETTE

          I.  Mines and Miners
         II.  The Lowest Depths
        III.  Babet, Gueulemer, Claquesous, and Montparnasse
         IV.  Composition of the Troupe

     BOOK EIGHTH.--THE WICKED POOR MAN

          I.  Marius, while seeking a Girl in a Bonnet encounters a
                 Man in a Cap
         II.  Treasure Trove
        III.  Quadrifrons
         IV.  A Rose in Misery
          V.  A Providential Peep-Hole
         VI.  The Wild Man in his Lair
        VII.  Strategy and Tactics
       VIII.  The Ray of Light in the Hovel
         IX.  Jondrette comes near Weeping
          X.  Tariff of Licensed Cabs, Two Francs an Hour
         XI.  Offers of Service from Misery to Wretchedness
        XII.  The Use made of M. Leblanc's Five-Franc Piece
       XIII.  Solus cum Solo, in Loco Remoto, non cogitabuntur
                 orare Pater Noster
        XIV.  In which a Police Agent bestows Two Fistfuls on a Lawyer
         XV.  Jondrette makes his Purchases
        XVI.  In which will be found the Words to an English Air
                  which was in Fashion in 1832
       XVII.  The Use made of Marius' Five-Franc Piece
      XVIII.  Marius' Two Chairs form a Vis-a-Vis
        XIX.  Occupying One's Self with Obscure Depths
         XX.  The Trap
        XXI.  One should always begin by arresting the Victims
       XXII.  The Little One who was crying in Volume Two



     VOLUME IV

     BOOK FIRST.--A FEW PAGES OF HISTORY

        I.  Well Cut
       II.  Badly Sewed
      III.  Louis Philippe
       IV.  Cracks beneath the Foundation
        V.  Facts whence History springs and which History ignores
       VI.  Enjolras and his Lieutenants

     BOOK SECOND.--EPONINE

        I.  The Lark's Meadow
       II.  Embryonic Formation of Crimes in the Incubation of Prisons
      III.  Apparition to Father Mabeuf
       IV.  An Apparition to Marius

     BOOK THIRD.--THE HOUSE IN THE RUE PLUMET

        I.  The House with a Secret
       II.  Jean Valjean as a National Guard
      III.  Foliis ac Frondibus
       IV.  Change of Gate
        V.  The Rose perceives that it is an Engine of War
       VI.  The Battle Begun
      VII.  To One Sadness oppose a Sadness and a Half
     VIII.  The Chain-Gang

     BOOK FOURTH.--SUCCOR FROM BELOW MAY TURN OUT TO BE SUCCOR FROM ON HIGH

        I.  A Wound without, Healing within
       II.  Mother Plutarque finds no Difficulty in explaining a Phenomenon

     BOOK FIFTH.--THE END OF WHICH DOES NOT RESEMBLE THE BEGINNING

        I.  Solitude and Barracks Combined
       II.  Cosette's Apprehensions
      III.  Enriched with Commentaries by Toussaint
       IV.  A Heart beneath a Stone
        V.  Cosette after the Letter
       VI.  Old People are made to go out opportunely

     BOOK SIXTH.--LITTLE GAVROCHE

        I.  The Malicious Playfulness of the Wind
       II.  In which Little Gavroche extracts Profit from Napoleon the Great
      III.  The Vicissitudes of Flight

     BOOK SEVENTH.--SLANG

        I.  Origin
       II.  Roots
      III.  Slang which weeps and Slang which laughs
       IV.  The Two Duties: To Watch and to Hope

     BOOK EIGHTH.--ENCHANTMENTS AND DESOLATIONS

        I.  Full Light
       II.  The Bewilderment of Perfect Happiness
      III.  The Beginning of Shadow
       IV.  A Cab runs in English and barks in Slang
        V.  Things of the Night
       VI.  Marius becomes Practical once more to the Extent of
                Giving Cosette his Address
      VII. The Old Heart and the Young Heart in the Presence
                of Each Other

     BOOK NINTH.--WHITHER ARE THEY GOING?

        I.  Jean Valjean
       II.  Marius
      III.  M. Mabeuf

     BOOK TENTH.--THE 5TH OF JUNE, 1832

        I.  The Surface of the Question
       II.  The Root of the Matter
      III.  A Burial; an Occasion to be born again
       IV.  The Ebullitions of Former Days
        V.  Originality of Paris

     BOOK ELEVENTH.--THE ATOM FRATERNIZES WITH THE HURRICANE

        I.  Some Explanations with Regard to the Origin of Gavroche's
                Poetry.  The Influence of an Academician on this Poetry
       II.  Gavroche on the March
      III.  Just Indignation of a Hair-dresser
       IV.  The Child is amazed at the Old Man
        V.  The Old Man
       VI.  Recruits

     BOOK TWELFTH.--CORINTHE

        I.  History of Corinthe from its Foundation
       II.  Preliminary Gayeties
      III.  Night begins to descend upon Grantaire
       IV.  An Attempt to console the Widow Hucheloup
        V.  Preparations
       VI.  Waiting
      VII.  The Man recruited in the Rue des Billettes
     VIII.  Many Interrogation Points with Regard to a Certain
                Le Cabuc, whose Name may not have been Le Cabuc

     BOOK THIRTEENTH.--MARIUS ENTERS THE SHADOW

        I.  From the Rue Plumet to the Quartier Saint-Denis
       II.  An Owl's View of Paris
      III.  The Extreme Edge

     BOOK FOURTEENTH.--THE GRANDEURS OF DESPAIR

        I.  The Flag: Act First
       II.  The Flag: Act Second
      III.  Gavroche would have done better to accept Enjolras' Carbine
       IV.  The Barrel of Powder
        V.  End of the Verses of Jean Prouvaire
       VI.  The Agony of Death after the Agony of Life
      VII.  Gavroche as a Profound Calculator of Distances

     BOOK FIFTEENTH.--THE RUE DE L'HOMME ARME

        I.  A Drinker is a Babbler
       II.  The Street Urchin an Enemy of Light
      III.  While Cosette and Toussaint are Asleep
       IV.  Gavroche's Excess of Zeal



     VOLUME V

     BOOK FIRST.--THE WAR BETWEEN FOUR WALLS

         I.  The Charybdis of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and the
               Scylla of the Faubourg du Temple
        II.  What Is to Be Done in the Abyss if One Does Not Converse
       III.  Light and Shadow
        IV.  Minus Five, Plus One
         V.  The Horizon Which One Beholds from the Summit of a Barricade
        VI.  Marius Haggard, Javert Laconic
       VII.  The Situation Becomes Aggravated
      VIII.  The Artillery-men Compel People to Take Them Seriously
        IX.  Employment of the Old Talents of a Poacher and That
               Infallible Marksmanship Which Influenced the
               Condemnation of 1796
         X.  Dawn
        XI.  The Shot Which Misses Nothing and Kills No One
       XII.  Disorder a Partisan of Order
      XIII.  Passing Gleams
       XIV.  Wherein Will Appear the Name of Enjolras' Mistress
        XV.  Gavroche Outside
       XVI.  How from a Brother One Becomes a Father
      XVII.  Mortuus Pater Filium Moriturum Expectat
     XVIII.  The Vulture Becomes Prey
       XIX.  Jean Valjean Takes His Revenge
        XX.  The Dead Are in the Right and the Living Are Not in the Wrong
       XXI.  The Heroes
      XXII.  Foot to Foot
     XXIII.  Orestes Fasting and Pylades Drunk
      XXIV.  Prisoner

     BOOK SECOND.--THE INTESTINE OF THE LEVIATHAN

         I.  The Land Impoverished by the Sea
        II.  Ancient History of the Sewer
       III.  Bruneseau
        IV.  Bruneseau
         V.  Present Progress
        VI.  Future Progress

     BOOK THIRD.--MUD BUT THE SOUL

         I.  The Sewer and Its Surprises
        II.  Explanation
       III.  The "Spun" Man
        IV.  He Also Bears His Cross
         V.  In the Case of Sand, as in That of Woman, There Is a
               Fineness Which Is Treacherous
        VI.  The Fontis
       VII.  One Sometimes Runs Aground When One Fancies That
               One Is Disembarking
      VIII.  The Torn Coat-Tail
        IX.  Marius Produces on Some One Who Is a Judge of the
               Matter, the Effect of Being Dead
         X.  Return of the Son Who Was Prodigal of His Life
        XI.  Concussion in the Absolute
       XII.  The Grandfather

     BOOK FOURTH.--JAVERT DERAILED

         I.  Javert

     BOOK FIFTH.--GRANDSON AND GRANDFATHER

         I.  In Which the Tree with the Zinc Plaster Appears Again
        II.  Marius, Emerging from Civil War, Makes Ready for
               Domestic War
       III.  Marius Attacked
        IV.  Mademoiselle Gillenormand Ends by No Longer Thinking
               It a Bad Thing That M. Fauchelevent Should Have
               Entered With Something Under His Arm
         V.  Deposit Your Money in a Forest Rather than with a Notary
        VI.  The Two Old Men Do Everything, Each One After His
               Own Fashion, to Render Cosette Happy
       VII.  The Effects of Dreams Mingled with Happiness
      VIII.  Two Men Impossible to Find

     BOOK SIXTH.--THE SLEEPLESS NIGHT

         I.  The 16th of February, 1833
        II.  Jean Valjean Still Wears His Arm in a Sling
       III.  The Inseparable
        IV.  The Immortal Liver

     BOOK SEVENTH.--THE LAST DRAUGHT FROM THE CUP

         I.  The Seventh Circle and the Eighth Heaven
        II.  The Obscurities Which a Revelation Can Contain

     BOOK EIGHTH.--FADING AWAY OF THE TWILIGHT

         I.  The Lower Chamber
        II.  Another Step Backwards
       III.  They Recall the Garden of the Rue Plumet
        IV.  Attraction and Extinction

     BOOK NINTH.--SUPREME SHADOW, SUPREME DAWN

         I.  Pity for the Unhappy, but Indulgence for the Happy
        II.  Last Flickerings of a Lamp Without Oil
       III.  A Pen Is Heavy to the Man Who Lifted the
               Fauchelevent's Cart
        IV.  A Bottle of Ink Which Only Succeeded in Whitening
         V.  A Night Behind Which There Is Day
        VI.  The Grass Covers and the Rain Effaces





LES MISERABLES





VOLUME I.--FANTINE.




PREFACE


So long as there shall exist, by virtue of law and custom, decrees of
damnation pronounced by society, artificially creating hells amid the
civilization of earth, and adding the element of human fate to divine
destiny; so long as the three great problems of the century--the
degradation of man through pauperism, the corruption of woman through
hunger, the crippling of children through lack of light--are unsolved;
so long as social asphyxia is possible in any part of the world;--in
other words, and with a still wider significance, so long as ignorance
and poverty exist on earth, books of the nature of Les Miserables cannot
fail to be of use.

HAUTEVILLE HOUSE, 1862.




FANTINE




BOOK FIRST--A JUST MAN




CHAPTER I--M. MYRIEL

In 1815, M. Charles-Francois-Bienvenu Myriel was Bishop of D---- He was
an old man of about seventy-five years of age; he had occupied the see
of D---- since 1806.

Although this detail has no connection whatever with the real substance
of what we are about to relate, it will not be superfluous, if merely
for the sake of exactness in all points, to mention here the various
rumors and remarks which had been in circulation about him from the very
moment when he arrived in the diocese. True or false, that which is said
of men often occupies as important a place in their lives, and above all
in their destinies, as that which they do. M. Myriel was the son of a
councillor of the Parliament of Aix; hence he belonged to the nobility
of the bar. It was said that his father, destining him to be the heir of
his own post, had married him at a very early age, eighteen or twenty,
in accordance with a custom which is rather widely prevalent in
parliamentary families. In spite of this marriage, however, it was said
that Charles Myriel created a great deal of talk. He was well formed,
though rather short in stature, elegant, graceful, intelligent; the
whole of the first portion of his life had been devoted to the world and
to gallantry.

The Revolution came; events succeeded each other with precipitation; the
parliamentary families, decimated, pursued, hunted down, were dispersed.
M. Charles Myriel emigrated to Italy at the very beginning of the
Revolution. There his wife died of a malady of the chest, from which she
had long suffered. He had no children. What took place next in the fate
of M. Myriel? The ruin of the French society of the olden days, the fall
of his own family, the tragic spectacles of '93, which were, perhaps,
even more alarming to the emigrants who viewed them from a distance,
with the magnifying powers of terror,--did these cause the ideas of
renunciation and solitude to germinate in him? Was he, in the midst of
these distractions, these affections which absorbed his life, suddenly
smitten with one of those mysterious and terrible blows which sometimes
overwhelm, by striking to his heart, a man whom public catastrophes
would not shake, by striking at his existence and his fortune? No one
could have told: all that was known was, that when he returned from
Italy he was a priest.

In 1804, M. Myriel was the Cure of B---- [Brignolles]. He was already
advanced in years, and lived in a very retired manner.

About the epoch of the coronation, some petty affair connected with
his curacy--just what, is not precisely known--took him to Paris.
Among other powerful persons to whom he went to solicit aid for his
parishioners was M. le Cardinal Fesch. One day, when the Emperor
had come to visit his uncle, the worthy Cure, who was waiting in the
anteroom, found himself present when His Majesty passed. Napoleon,
on finding himself observed with a certain curiosity by this old man,
turned round and said abruptly:--

"Who is this good man who is staring at me?"

"Sire," said M. Myriel, "you are looking at a good man, and I at a great
man. Each of us can profit by it."

That very evening, the Emperor asked the Cardinal the name of the Cure,
and some time afterwards M. Myriel was utterly astonished to learn that
he had been appointed Bishop of D----

What truth was there, after all, in the stories which were invented as
to the early portion of M. Myriel's life? No one knew. Very few families
had been acquainted with the Myriel family before the Revolution.

M. Myriel had to undergo the fate of every newcomer in a little town,
where there are many mouths which talk, and very few heads which think.
He was obliged to undergo it although he was a bishop, and because
he was a bishop. But after all, the rumors with which his name
was connected were rumors only,--noise, sayings, words; less than
words--palabres, as the energetic language of the South expresses it.

However that may be, after nine years of episcopal power and of
residence in D----, all the stories and subjects of conversation which
engross petty towns and petty people at the outset had fallen into
profound oblivion. No one would have dared to mention them; no one would
have dared to recall them.

M. Myriel had arrived at D---- accompanied by an elderly spinster,
Mademoiselle Baptistine, who was his sister, and ten years his junior.

Their only domestic was a female servant of the same age as Mademoiselle
Baptistine, and named Madame Magloire, who, after having been the
servant of M. le Cure, now assumed the double title of maid to
Mademoiselle and housekeeper to Monseigneur.

Mademoiselle Baptistine was a long, pale, thin, gentle creature; she
realized the ideal expressed by the word "respectable"; for it seems
that a woman must needs be a mother in order to be venerable. She
had never been pretty; her whole life, which had been nothing but a
succession of holy deeds, had finally conferred upon her a sort of
pallor and transparency; and as she advanced in years she had acquired
what may be called the beauty of goodness. What had been leanness in
her youth had become transparency in her maturity; and this diaphaneity
allowed the angel to be seen. She was a soul rather than a virgin. Her
person seemed made of a shadow; there was hardly sufficient body to
provide for sex; a little matter enclosing a light; large eyes forever
drooping;--a mere pretext for a soul's remaining on the earth.

Madame Magloire was a little, fat, white old woman, corpulent and
bustling; always out of breath,--in the first place, because of her
activity, and in the next, because of her asthma.

On his arrival, M. Myriel was installed in the episcopal palace with
the honors required by the Imperial decrees, which class a bishop
immediately after a major-general. The mayor and the president paid the
first call on him, and he, in turn, paid the first call on the general
and the prefect.

The installation over, the town waited to see its bishop at work.




CHAPTER II--M. MYRIEL BECOMES M. WELCOME


The episcopal palace of D---- adjoins the hospital.

The episcopal palace was a huge and beautiful house, built of stone at
the beginning of the last century by M. Henri Puget, Doctor of Theology
of the Faculty of Paris, Abbe of Simore, who had been Bishop of D---- in
1712. This palace was a genuine seignorial residence. Everything about
it had a grand air,--the apartments of the Bishop, the drawing-rooms,
the chambers, the principal courtyard, which was very large, with walks
encircling it under arcades in the old Florentine fashion, and gardens
planted with magnificent trees. In the dining-room, a long and superb
gallery which was situated on the ground-floor and opened on the
gardens, M. Henri Puget had entertained in state, on July 29, 1714, My
Lords Charles Brulart de Genlis, archbishop; Prince d'Embrun; Antoine
de Mesgrigny, the capuchin, Bishop of Grasse; Philippe de Vendome, Grand
Prior of France, Abbe of Saint Honore de Lerins; Francois de Berton de
Crillon, bishop, Baron de Vence; Cesar de Sabran de Forcalquier, bishop,
Seignor of Glandeve; and Jean Soanen, Priest of the Oratory, preacher in
ordinary to the king, bishop, Seignor of Senez. The portraits of these
seven reverend personages decorated this apartment; and this memorable
date, the 29th of July, 1714, was there engraved in letters of gold on a
table of white marble.

The hospital was a low and narrow building of a single story, with a
small garden.

Three days after his arrival, the Bishop visited the hospital. The visit
ended, he had the director requested to be so good as to come to his
house.

"Monsieur the director of the hospital," said he to him, "how many sick
people have you at the present moment?"

"Twenty-six, Monseigneur."

"That was the number which I counted," said the Bishop.

"The beds," pursued the director, "are very much crowded against each
other."

"That is what I observed."

"The halls are nothing but rooms, and it is with difficulty that the air
can be changed in them."

"So it seems to me."

"And then, when there is a ray of sun, the garden is very small for the
convalescents."

"That was what I said to myself."

"In case of epidemics,--we have had the typhus fever this year; we
had the sweating sickness two years ago, and a hundred patients at
times,--we know not what to do."

"That is the thought which occurred to me."

"What would you have, Monseigneur?" said the director. "One must resign
one's self."

This conversation took place in the gallery dining-room on the
ground-floor.

The Bishop remained silent for a moment; then he turned abruptly to the
director of the hospital.

"Monsieur," said he, "how many beds do you think this hall alone would
hold?"

"Monseigneur's dining-room?" exclaimed the stupefied director.

The Bishop cast a glance round the apartment, and seemed to be taking
measures and calculations with his eyes.

"It would hold full twenty beds," said he, as though speaking to
himself. Then, raising his voice:--

"Hold, Monsieur the director of the hospital, I will tell you something.
There is evidently a mistake here. There are thirty-six of you, in five
or six small rooms. There are three of us here, and we have room for
sixty. There is some mistake, I tell you; you have my house, and I have
yours. Give me back my house; you are at home here."

On the following day the thirty-six patients were installed in the
Bishop's palace, and the Bishop was settled in the hospital.

M. Myriel had no property, his family having been ruined by the
Revolution. His sister was in receipt of a yearly income of five hundred
francs, which sufficed for her personal wants at the vicarage. M. Myriel
received from the State, in his quality of bishop, a salary of fifteen
thousand francs. On the very day when he took up his abode in the
hospital, M. Myriel settled on the disposition of this sum once for
all, in the following manner. We transcribe here a note made by his own
hand:--


NOTE ON THE REGULATION OF MY HOUSEHOLD EXPENSES.

  For the little seminary . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1,500 livres
  Society of the  mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      100   "
  For the Lazarists of Montdidier . . . . . . . . . .      100   "
  Seminary for foreign missions in Paris  . . . . . .      200   "
  Congregation of the Holy Spirit . . . . . . . . . .      150   "
  Religious establishments of the Holy Land . . . . .      100   "
  Charitable maternity societies  . . . . . . . . . .      300   "
  Extra, for that of Arles  . . . . . . . . . . . . .       50   "
  Work for the amelioration of prisons  . . . . . . .      400   "
  Work for the relief and delivery of prisoners . . .      500   "
  To liberate fathers of families incarcerated for debt  1,000   "
  Addition to the salary of the poor teachers of the
       diocese  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2,000   "
  Public granary of the Hautes-Alpes  . . . . . . . .      100   "
  Congregation of the ladies of D----, of Manosque, and of
       Sisteron, for the gratuitous instruction of poor
       girls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1,500   "
  For the poor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6,000   "
  My personal expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1,000   "
                                                        ------
       Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15,000   "


M. Myriel made no change in this arrangement during the entire period
that he occupied the see of D---- As has been seen, he called it
regulating his household expenses.

This arrangement was accepted with absolute submission by Mademoiselle
Baptistine. This holy woman regarded Monseigneur of D---- as at one and
the same time her brother and her bishop, her friend according to the
flesh and her superior according to the Church. She simply loved and
venerated him. When he spoke, she bowed; when he acted, she yielded her
adherence. Their only servant, Madame Magloire, grumbled a little. It
will be observed that Monsieur the Bishop had reserved for himself
only one thousand livres, which, added to the pension of Mademoiselle
Baptistine, made fifteen hundred francs a year. On these fifteen hundred
francs these two old women and the old man subsisted.

And when a village curate came to D----, the Bishop still found means to
entertain him, thanks to the severe economy of Madame Magloire, and to
the intelligent administration of Mademoiselle Baptistine.

One day, after he had been in D---- about three months, the Bishop
said:--

"And still I am quite cramped with it all!"

"I should think so!" exclaimed Madame Magloire. "Monseigneur has not
even claimed the allowance which the department owes him for the expense
of his carriage in town, and for his journeys about the diocese. It was
customary for bishops in former days."

"Hold!" cried the Bishop, "you are quite right, Madame Magloire."

And he made his demand.

Some time afterwards the General Council took this demand under
consideration, and voted him an annual sum of three thousand francs,
under this heading: Allowance to M. the Bishop for expenses of carriage,
expenses of posting, and expenses of pastoral visits.

This provoked a great outcry among the local burgesses; and a senator
of the Empire, a former member of the Council of the Five Hundred
which favored the 18 Brumaire, and who was provided with a magnificent
senatorial office in the vicinity of the town of D----, wrote to M.
Bigot de Preameneu, the minister of public worship, a very angry and
confidential note on the subject, from which we extract these authentic
lines:--

"Expenses of carriage? What can be done with it in a town of less than
four thousand inhabitants? Expenses of journeys? What is the use
of these trips, in the first place? Next, how can the posting be
accomplished in these mountainous parts? There are no roads. No one
travels otherwise than on horseback. Even the bridge between Durance and
Chateau-Arnoux can barely support ox-teams. These priests are all thus,
greedy and avaricious. This man played the good priest when he
first came. Now he does like the rest; he must have a carriage and a
posting-chaise, he must have luxuries, like the bishops of the olden
days. Oh, all this priesthood! Things will not go well, M. le Comte,
until the Emperor has freed us from these black-capped rascals. Down
with the Pope! [Matters were getting embroiled with Rome.] For my part,
I am for Caesar alone." Etc., etc.

On the other hand, this affair afforded great delight to Madame
Magloire. "Good," said she to Mademoiselle Baptistine; "Monseigneur
began with other people, but he has had to wind up with himself, after
all. He has regulated all his charities. Now here are three thousand
francs for us! At last!"

That same evening the Bishop wrote out and handed to his sister a
memorandum conceived in the following terms:--

EXPENSES OF CARRIAGE AND CIRCUIT.

  For furnishing meat soup to the patients in the hospital. 1,500 livres
  For the maternity charitable society of Aix . . . . . . .   250   "
  For the maternity charitable society of Draguignan  . . .   250   "
  For foundlings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   500   "
  For orphans   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   500   "
                                                            -----
       Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,000   "

Such was M. Myriel's budget.

As for the chance episcopal perquisites, the fees for marriage bans,
dispensations, private baptisms, sermons, benedictions, of churches or
chapels, marriages, etc., the Bishop levied them on the wealthy with all
the more asperity, since he bestowed them on the needy.

After a time, offerings of money flowed in. Those who had and those who
lacked knocked at M. Myriel's door,--the latter in search of the alms
which the former came to deposit. In less than a year the Bishop had
become the treasurer of all benevolence and the cashier of all those
in distress. Considerable sums of money passed through his hands, but
nothing could induce him to make any change whatever in his mode of
life, or add anything superfluous to his bare necessities.

Far from it. As there is always more wretchedness below than there
is brotherhood above, all was given away, so to speak, before it was
received. It was like water on dry soil; no matter how much money he
received, he never had any. Then he stripped himself.

The usage being that bishops shall announce their baptismal names at the
head of their charges and their pastoral letters, the poor people of the
country-side had selected, with a sort of affectionate instinct, among
the names and prenomens of their bishop, that which had a meaning for
them; and they never called him anything except Monseigneur Bienvenu
[Welcome]. We will follow their example, and will also call him thus
when we have occasion to name him. Moreover, this appellation pleased
him.

"I like that name," said he. "Bienvenu makes up for the Monseigneur."

We do not claim that the portrait herewith presented is probable; we
confine ourselves to stating that it resembles the original.




CHAPTER III--A HARD BISHOPRIC FOR A GOOD BISHOP


The Bishop did not omit his pastoral visits because he had converted his
carriage into alms. The diocese of D---- is a fatiguing one. There are
very few plains and a great many mountains; hardly any roads, as we have
just seen; thirty-two curacies, forty-one vicarships, and two hundred
and eighty-five auxiliary chapels. To visit all these is quite a task.

The Bishop managed to do it. He went on foot when it was in the
neighborhood, in a tilted spring-cart when it was on the plain, and on
a donkey in the mountains. The two old women accompanied him. When the
trip was too hard for them, he went alone.

One day he arrived at Senez, which is an ancient episcopal city. He was
mounted on an ass. His purse, which was very dry at that moment, did not
permit him any other equipage. The mayor of the town came to receive
him at the gate of the town, and watched him dismount from his ass,
with scandalized eyes. Some of the citizens were laughing around him.
"Monsieur the Mayor," said the Bishop, "and Messieurs Citizens, I
perceive that I shock you. You think it very arrogant in a poor priest
to ride an animal which was used by Jesus Christ. I have done so from
necessity, I assure you, and not from vanity."

In the course of these trips he was kind and indulgent, and talked
rather than preached. He never went far in search of his arguments and
his examples. He quoted to the inhabitants of one district the example
of a neighboring district. In the cantons where they were harsh to the
poor, he said: "Look at the people of Briancon! They have conferred on
the poor, on widows and orphans, the right to have their meadows mown
three days in advance of every one else. They rebuild their houses for
them gratuitously when they are ruined. Therefore it is a country which
is blessed by God. For a whole century, there has not been a single
murderer among them."

In villages which were greedy for profit and harvest, he said: "Look at
the people of Embrun! If, at the harvest season, the father of a family
has his son away on service in the army, and his daughters at service in
the town, and if he is ill and incapacitated, the cure recommends him to
the prayers of the congregation; and on Sunday, after the mass, all the
inhabitants of the village--men, women, and children--go to the poor
man's field and do his harvesting for him, and carry his straw and his
grain to his granary." To families divided by questions of money and
inheritance he said: "Look at the mountaineers of Devolny, a country so
wild that the nightingale is not heard there once in fifty years.
Well, when the father of a family dies, the boys go off to seek their
fortunes, leaving the property to the girls, so that they may find
husbands." To the cantons which had a taste for lawsuits, and where the
farmers ruined themselves in stamped paper, he said: "Look at those good
peasants in the valley of Queyras! There are three thousand souls of
them. Mon Dieu! it is like a little republic. Neither judge nor bailiff
is known there. The mayor does everything. He allots the imposts,
taxes each person conscientiously, judges quarrels for nothing, divides
inheritances without charge, pronounces sentences gratuitously; and he
is obeyed, because he is a just man among simple men." To villages where
he found no schoolmaster, he quoted once more the people of Queyras: "Do
you know how they manage?" he said. "Since a little country of a
dozen or fifteen hearths cannot always support a teacher, they have
school-masters who are paid by the whole valley, who make the round
of the villages, spending a week in this one, ten days in that, and
instruct them. These teachers go to the fairs. I have seen them there.
They are to be recognized by the quill pens which they wear in the cord
of their hat. Those who teach reading only have one pen; those who teach
reading and reckoning have two pens; those who teach reading, reckoning,
and Latin have three pens. But what a disgrace to be ignorant! Do like
the people of Queyras!"

Thus he discoursed gravely and paternally; in default of examples, he
invented parables, going directly to the point, with few phrases and
many images, which characteristic formed the real eloquence of Jesus
Christ. And being convinced himself, he was persuasive.




CHAPTER IV--WORKS CORRESPONDING TO WORDS

His conversation was gay and affable. He put himself on a level with the
two old women who had passed their lives beside him. When he laughed,
it was the laugh of a schoolboy. Madame Magloire liked to call him Your
Grace [Votre Grandeur]. One day he rose from his arm-chair, and went
to his library in search of a book. This book was on one of the upper
shelves. As the bishop was rather short of stature, he could not
reach it. "Madame Magloire," said he, "fetch me a chair. My greatness
[grandeur] does not reach as far as that shelf."

One of his distant relatives, Madame la Comtesse de Lo, rarely allowed
an opportunity to escape of enumerating, in his presence, what she
designated as "the expectations" of her three sons. She had numerous
relatives, who were very old and near to death, and of whom her sons
were the natural heirs. The youngest of the three was to receive from a
grand-aunt a good hundred thousand livres of income; the second was the
heir by entail to the title of the Duke, his uncle; the eldest was to
succeed to the peerage of his grandfather. The Bishop was accustomed to
listen in silence to these innocent and pardonable maternal boasts. On
one occasion, however, he appeared to be more thoughtful than usual,
while Madame de Lo was relating once again the details of all these
inheritances and all these "expectations." She interrupted herself
impatiently: "Mon Dieu, cousin! What are you thinking about?" "I am
thinking," replied the Bishop, "of a singular remark, which is to be
found, I believe, in St. Augustine,--'Place your hopes in the man from
whom you do not inherit.'"

At another time, on receiving a notification of the decease of a
gentleman of the country-side, wherein not only the dignities of the
dead man, but also the feudal and noble qualifications of all his
relatives, spread over an entire page: "What a stout back Death has!"
he exclaimed. "What a strange burden of titles is cheerfully imposed
on him, and how much wit must men have, in order thus to press the tomb
into the service of vanity!"

He was gifted, on occasion, with a gentle raillery, which almost always
concealed a serious meaning. In the course of one Lent, a youthful vicar
came to D----, and preached in the cathedral. He was tolerably eloquent.
The subject of his sermon was charity. He urged the rich to give to the
poor, in order to avoid hell, which he depicted in the most frightful
manner of which he was capable, and to win paradise, which he
represented as charming and desirable. Among the audience there was
a wealthy retired merchant, who was somewhat of a usurer, named M.
Geborand, who had amassed two millions in the manufacture of coarse
cloth, serges, and woollen galloons. Never in his whole life had M.
Geborand bestowed alms on any poor wretch. After the delivery of that
sermon, it was observed that he gave a sou every Sunday to the poor old
beggar-women at the door of the cathedral. There were six of them to
share it. One day the Bishop caught sight of him in the act of bestowing
this charity, and said to his sister, with a smile, "There is M.
Geborand purchasing paradise for a sou."

When it was a question of charity, he was not to be rebuffed even by
a refusal, and on such occasions he gave utterance to remarks which
induced reflection. Once he was begging for the poor in a drawing-room
of the town; there was present the Marquis de Champtercier, a wealthy
and avaricious old man, who contrived to be, at one and the same time,
an ultra-royalist and an ultra-Voltairian. This variety of man has
actually existed. When the Bishop came to him, he touched his arm, "You
must give me something, M. le Marquis." The Marquis turned round and
answered dryly, "I have poor people of my own, Monseigneur." "Give them
to me," replied the Bishop.

One day he preached the following sermon in the cathedral:--


"My very dear brethren, my good friends, there are thirteen hundred
and twenty thousand peasants' dwellings in France which have but three
openings; eighteen hundred and seventeen thousand hovels which have but
two openings, the door and one window; and three hundred and forty-six
thousand cabins besides which have but one opening, the door. And this
arises from a thing which is called the tax on doors and windows. Just
put poor families, old women and little children, in those buildings,
and behold the fevers and maladies which result! Alas! God gives air to
men; the law sells it to them. I do not blame the law, but I bless God.
In the department of the Isere, in the Var, in the two departments
of the Alpes, the Hautes, and the Basses, the peasants have not even
wheelbarrows; they transport their manure on the backs of men; they have
no candles, and they burn resinous sticks, and bits of rope dipped in
pitch. That is the state of affairs throughout the whole of the hilly
country of Dauphine. They make bread for six months at one time; they
bake it with dried cow-dung. In the winter they break this bread up with
an axe, and they soak it for twenty-four hours, in order to render it
eatable. My brethren, have pity! behold the suffering on all sides of
you!"

Born a Provencal, he easily familiarized himself with the dialect of the
south. He said, "En be! moussu, ses sage?" as in lower Languedoc; "Onte
anaras passa?" as in the Basses-Alpes; "Puerte un bouen moutu embe un
bouen fromage grase," as in upper Dauphine. This pleased the people
extremely, and contributed not a little to win him access to all
spirits. He was perfectly at home in the thatched cottage and in the
mountains. He understood how to say the grandest things in the most
vulgar of idioms. As he spoke all tongues, he entered into all hearts.

Moreover, he was the same towards people of the world and towards
the lower classes. He condemned nothing in haste and without taking
circumstances into account. He said, "Examine the road over which the
fault has passed."

Being, as he described himself with a smile, an ex-sinner, he had none
of the asperities of austerity, and he professed, with a good deal
of distinctness, and without the frown of the ferociously virtuous, a
doctrine which may be summed up as follows:--

"Man has upon him his flesh, which is at once his burden and his
temptation. He drags it with him and yields to it. He must watch it,
check it, repress it, and obey it only at the last extremity. There may
be some fault even in this obedience; but the fault thus committed is
venial; it is a fall, but a fall on the knees which may terminate in
prayer.

"To be a saint is the exception; to be an upright man is the rule. Err,
fall, sin if you will, but be upright.

"The least possible sin is the law of man. No sin at all is the dream
of the angel. All which is terrestrial is subject to sin. Sin is a
gravitation."

When he saw everyone exclaiming very loudly, and growing angry very
quickly, "Oh! oh!" he said, with a smile; "to all appearance, this is
a great crime which all the world commits. These are hypocrisies
which have taken fright, and are in haste to make protest and to put
themselves under shelter."

He was indulgent towards women and poor people, on whom the burden of
human society rest. He said, "The faults of women, of children, of the
feeble, the indigent, and the ignorant, are the fault of the husbands,
the fathers, the masters, the strong, the rich, and the wise."

He said, moreover, "Teach those who are ignorant as many things as
possible; society is culpable, in that it does not afford instruction
gratis; it is responsible for the night which it produces. This soul
is full of shadow; sin is therein committed. The guilty one is not the
person who has committed the sin, but the person who has created the
shadow."

It will be perceived that he had a peculiar manner of his own of judging
things: I suspect that he obtained it from the Gospel.

One day he heard a criminal case, which was in preparation and on the
point of trial, discussed in a drawing-room. A wretched man, being at
the end of his resources, had coined counterfeit money, out of love for
a woman, and for the child which he had had by her. Counterfeiting was
still punishable with death at that epoch. The woman had been arrested
in the act of passing the first false piece made by the man. She was
held, but there were no proofs except against her. She alone could
accuse her lover, and destroy him by her confession. She denied; they
insisted. She persisted in her denial. Thereupon an idea occurred to
the attorney for the crown. He invented an infidelity on the part of
the lover, and succeeded, by means of fragments of letters cunningly
presented, in persuading the unfortunate woman that she had a rival, and
that the man was deceiving her. Thereupon, exasperated by jealousy, she
denounced her lover, confessed all, proved all.

The man was ruined. He was shortly to be tried at Aix with his
accomplice. They were relating the matter, and each one was expressing
enthusiasm over the cleverness of the magistrate. By bringing jealousy
into play, he had caused the truth to burst forth in wrath, he had
educed the justice of revenge. The Bishop listened to all this in
silence. When they had finished, he inquired,--

"Where are this man and woman to be tried?"

"At the Court of Assizes."

He went on, "And where will the advocate of the crown be tried?"

A tragic event occurred at D---- A man was condemned to death for
murder. He was a wretched fellow, not exactly educated, not exactly
ignorant, who had been a mountebank at fairs, and a writer for the
public. The town took a great interest in the trial. On the eve of the
day fixed for the execution of the condemned man, the chaplain of the
prison fell ill. A priest was needed to attend the criminal in his
last moments. They sent for the cure. It seems that he refused to come,
saying, "That is no affair of mine. I have nothing to do with that
unpleasant task, and with that mountebank: I, too, am ill; and besides,
it is not my place." This reply was reported to the Bishop, who said,
"Monsieur le Cure is right: it is not his place; it is mine."

He went instantly to the prison, descended to the cell of the
"mountebank," called him by name, took him by the hand, and spoke to
him. He passed the entire day with him, forgetful of food and sleep,
praying to God for the soul of the condemned man, and praying the
condemned man for his own. He told him the best truths, which are also
the most simple. He was father, brother, friend; he was bishop only to
bless. He taught him everything, encouraged and consoled him. The man
was on the point of dying in despair. Death was an abyss to him. As he
stood trembling on its mournful brink, he recoiled with horror. He
was not sufficiently ignorant to be absolutely indifferent. His
condemnation, which had been a profound shock, had, in a manner, broken
through, here and there, that wall which separates us from the mystery
of things, and which we call life. He gazed incessantly beyond this
world through these fatal breaches, and beheld only darkness. The Bishop
made him see light.

On the following day, when they came to fetch the unhappy wretch, the
Bishop was still there. He followed him, and exhibited himself to the
eyes of the crowd in his purple camail and with his episcopal cross upon
his neck, side by side with the criminal bound with cords.

He mounted the tumbril with him, he mounted the scaffold with him. The
sufferer, who had been so gloomy and cast down on the preceding day, was
radiant. He felt that his soul was reconciled, and he hoped in God. The
Bishop embraced him, and at the moment when the knife was about to fall,
he said to him: "God raises from the dead him whom man slays; he whom
his brothers have rejected finds his Father once more. Pray, believe,
enter into life: the Father is there." When he descended from the
scaffold, there was something in his look which made the people draw
aside to let him pass. They did not know which was most worthy of
admiration, his pallor or his serenity. On his return to the humble
dwelling, which he designated, with a smile, as his palace, he said to
his sister, "I have just officiated pontifically."

Since the most sublime things are often those which are the least
understood, there were people in the town who said, when commenting on
this conduct of the Bishop, "It is affectation."

This, however, was a remark which was confined to the drawing-rooms.
The populace, which perceives no jest in holy deeds, was touched, and
admired him.

As for the Bishop, it was a shock to him to have beheld the guillotine,
and it was a long time before he recovered from it.

In fact, when the scaffold is there, all erected and prepared, it has
something about it which produces hallucination. One may feel a certain
indifference to the death penalty, one may refrain from pronouncing upon
it, from saying yes or no, so long as one has not seen a guillotine with
one's own eyes: but if one encounters one of them, the shock is violent;
one is forced to decide, and to take part for or against. Some admire
it, like de Maistre; others execrate it, like Beccaria. The guillotine
is the concretion of the law; it is called vindicte; it is not neutral,
and it does not permit you to remain neutral. He who sees it shivers
with the most mysterious of shivers. All social problems erect their
interrogation point around this chopping-knife. The scaffold is a
vision. The scaffold is not a piece of carpentry; the scaffold is not
a machine; the scaffold is not an inert bit of mechanism constructed of
wood, iron and cords.

It seems as though it were a being, possessed of I know not what sombre
initiative; one would say that this piece of carpenter's work saw, that
this machine heard, that this mechanism understood, that this wood,
this iron, and these cords were possessed of will. In the frightful
meditation into which its presence casts the soul the scaffold appears
in terrible guise, and as though taking part in what is going on. The
scaffold is the accomplice of the executioner; it devours, it eats
flesh, it drinks blood; the scaffold is a sort of monster fabricated
by the judge and the carpenter, a spectre which seems to live with a
horrible vitality composed of all the death which it has inflicted.

Therefore, the impression was terrible and profound; on the day
following the execution, and on many succeeding days, the Bishop
appeared to be crushed. The almost violent serenity of the funereal
moment had disappeared; the phantom of social justice tormented him. He,
who generally returned from all his deeds with a radiant satisfaction,
seemed to be reproaching himself. At times he talked to himself, and
stammered lugubrious monologues in a low voice. This is one which his
sister overheard one evening and preserved: "I did not think that it was
so monstrous. It is wrong to become absorbed in the divine law to such a
degree as not to perceive human law. Death belongs to God alone. By what
right do men touch that unknown thing?"

In course of time these impressions weakened and probably vanished.
Nevertheless, it was observed that the Bishop thenceforth avoided
passing the place of execution.

M. Myriel could be summoned at any hour to the bedside of the sick and
dying. He did not ignore the fact that therein lay his greatest duty and
his greatest labor. Widowed and orphaned families had no need to summon
him; he came of his own accord. He understood how to sit down and hold
his peace for long hours beside the man who had lost the wife of his
love, of the mother who had lost her child. As he knew the moment for
silence he knew also the moment for speech. Oh, admirable consoler! He
sought not to efface sorrow by forgetfulness, but to magnify and dignify
it by hope. He said:--

"Have a care of the manner in which you turn towards the dead. Think
not of that which perishes. Gaze steadily. You will perceive the living
light of your well-beloved dead in the depths of heaven." He knew that
faith is wholesome. He sought to counsel and calm the despairing man, by
pointing out to him the resigned man, and to transform the grief which
gazes upon a grave by showing him the grief which fixes its gaze upon a
star.




CHAPTER V--MONSEIGNEUR BIENVENU MADE HIS CASSOCKS LAST TOO LONG


The private life of M. Myriel was filled with the same thoughts as his
public life. The voluntary poverty in which the Bishop of D---- lived,
would have been a solemn and charming sight for any one who could have
viewed it close at hand.

Like all old men, and like the majority of thinkers, he slept little.
This brief slumber was profound. In the morning he meditated for an
hour, then he said his mass, either at the cathedral or in his own
house. His mass said, he broke his fast on rye bread dipped in the milk
of his own cows. Then he set to work.

A Bishop is a very busy man: he must every day receive the secretary
of the bishopric, who is generally a canon, and nearly every day his
vicars-general. He has congregations to reprove, privileges to grant,
a whole ecclesiastical library to examine,--prayer-books, diocesan
catechisms, books of hours, etc.,--charges to write, sermons to
authorize, cures and mayors to reconcile, a clerical correspondence, an
administrative correspondence; on one side the State, on the other the
Holy See; and a thousand matters of business.

What time was left to him, after these thousand details of business, and
his offices and his breviary, he bestowed first on the necessitous,
the sick, and the afflicted; the time which was left to him from the
afflicted, the sick, and the necessitous, he devoted to work. Sometimes
he dug in his garden; again, he read or wrote. He had but one word
for both these kinds of toil; he called them gardening. "The mind is a
garden," said he.

Towards mid-day, when the weather was fine, he went forth and took a
stroll in the country or in town, often entering lowly dwellings. He
was seen walking alone, buried in his own thoughts, his eyes cast down,
supporting himself on his long cane, clad in his wadded purple garment
of silk, which was very warm, wearing purple stockings inside his coarse
shoes, and surmounted by a flat hat which allowed three golden tassels
of large bullion to droop from its three points.

It was a perfect festival wherever he appeared. One would have said that
his presence had something warming and luminous about it. The children
and the old people came out to the doorsteps for the Bishop as for the
sun. He bestowed his blessing, and they blessed him. They pointed out
his house to any one who was in need of anything.

[Illustration: The Comfortor  1b1-5-comfortor]

Here and there he halted, accosted the little boys and girls, and smiled
upon the mothers. He visited the poor so long as he had any money; when
he no longer had any, he visited the rich.

As he made his cassocks last a long while, and did not wish to have it
noticed, he never went out in the town without his wadded purple cloak.
This inconvenienced him somewhat in summer.

On his return, he dined. The dinner resembled his breakfast.

At half-past eight in the evening he supped with his sister, Madame
Magloire standing behind them and serving them at table. Nothing could
be more frugal than this repast. If, however, the Bishop had one of his
cures to supper, Madame Magloire took advantage of the opportunity to
serve Monseigneur with some excellent fish from the lake, or with some
fine game from the mountains. Every cure furnished the pretext for
a good meal: the Bishop did not interfere. With that exception, his
ordinary diet consisted only of vegetables boiled in water, and oil
soup. Thus it was said in the town, when the Bishop does not indulge in
the cheer of a cure, he indulges in the cheer of a trappist.

After supper he conversed for half an hour with Mademoiselle Baptistine
and Madame Magloire; then he retired to his own room and set to writing,
sometimes on loose sheets, and again on the margin of some folio. He was
a man of letters and rather learned. He left behind him five or six
very curious manuscripts; among others, a dissertation on this verse in
Genesis, In the beginning, the spirit of God floated upon the waters.
With this verse he compares three texts: the Arabic verse which says,
The winds of God blew; Flavius Josephus who says, A wind from above was
precipitated upon the earth; and finally, the Chaldaic paraphrase of
Onkelos, which renders it, A wind coming from God blew upon the face of
the waters. In another dissertation, he examines the theological works
of Hugo, Bishop of Ptolemais, great-grand-uncle to the writer of this
book, and establishes the fact, that to this bishop must be attributed
the divers little works published during the last century, under the
pseudonym of Barleycourt.

Sometimes, in the midst of his reading, no matter what the book might
be which he had in his hand, he would suddenly fall into a profound
meditation, whence he only emerged to write a few lines on the pages of
the volume itself. These lines have often no connection whatever with
the book which contains them. We now have under our eyes a note written
by him on the margin of a quarto entitled Correspondence of Lord Germain
with Generals Clinton, Cornwallis, and the Admirals on the American
station. Versailles, Poincot, book-seller; and Paris, Pissot,
bookseller, Quai des Augustins.

Here is the note:--

"Oh, you who are!

"Ecclesiastes calls you the All-powerful; the Maccabees call you the
Creator; the Epistle to the Ephesians calls you liberty; Baruch calls
you Immensity; the Psalms call you Wisdom and Truth; John calls you
Light; the Books of Kings call you Lord; Exodus calls you Providence;
Leviticus, Sanctity; Esdras, Justice; the creation calls you God; man
calls you Father; but Solomon calls you Compassion, and that is the most
beautiful of all your names."

Toward nine o'clock in the evening the two women retired and betook
themselves to their chambers on the first floor, leaving him alone until
morning on the ground floor.

It is necessary that we should, in this place, give an exact idea of the
dwelling of the Bishop of D----




CHAPTER VI--WHO GUARDED HIS HOUSE FOR HIM

The house in which he lived consisted, as we have said, of a ground
floor, and one story above; three rooms on the ground floor, three
chambers on the first, and an attic above. Behind the house was a
garden, a quarter of an acre in extent. The two women occupied the
first floor; the Bishop was lodged below. The first room, opening on the
street, served him as dining-room, the second was his bedroom, and the
third his oratory. There was no exit possible from this oratory, except
by passing through the bedroom, nor from the bedroom, without passing
through the dining-room. At the end of the suite, in the oratory, there
was a detached alcove with a bed, for use in cases of hospitality.
The Bishop offered this bed to country curates whom business or the
requirements of their parishes brought to D----

The pharmacy of the hospital, a small building which had been added
to the house, and abutted on the garden, had been transformed into
a kitchen and cellar. In addition to this, there was in the garden a
stable, which had formerly been the kitchen of the hospital, and in
which the Bishop kept two cows. No matter what the quantity of milk they
gave, he invariably sent half of it every morning to the sick people in
the hospital. "I am paying my tithes," he said.

His bedroom was tolerably large, and rather difficult to warm in bad
weather. As wood is extremely dear at D----, he hit upon the idea of
having a compartment of boards constructed in the cow-shed. Here he
passed his evenings during seasons of severe cold: he called it his
winter salon.

In this winter salon, as in the dining-room, there was no other
furniture than a square table in white wood, and four straw-seated
chairs. In addition to this the dining-room was ornamented with an
antique sideboard, painted pink, in water colors. Out of a similar
sideboard, properly draped with white napery and imitation lace, the
Bishop had constructed the altar which decorated his oratory.

His wealthy penitents and the sainted women of D---- had more than once
assessed themselves to raise the money for a new altar for Monseigneur's
oratory; on each occasion he had taken the money and had given it to
the poor. "The most beautiful of altars," he said, "is the soul of an
unhappy creature consoled and thanking God."

In his oratory there were two straw prie-Dieu, and there was an
arm-chair, also in straw, in his bedroom. When, by chance, he received
seven or eight persons at one time, the prefect, or the general, or the
staff of the regiment in garrison, or several pupils from the little
seminary, the chairs had to be fetched from the winter salon in the
stable, the prie-Dieu from the oratory, and the arm-chair from the
bedroom: in this way as many as eleven chairs could be collected for the
visitors. A room was dismantled for each new guest.

It sometimes happened that there were twelve in the party; the Bishop
then relieved the embarrassment of the situation by standing in front
of the chimney if it was winter, or by strolling in the garden if it was
summer.

There was still another chair in the detached alcove, but the straw was
half gone from it, and it had but three legs, so that it was of service
only when propped against the wall. Mademoiselle Baptistine had also in
her own room a very large easy-chair of wood, which had formerly been
gilded, and which was covered with flowered pekin; but they had been
obliged to hoist this bergere up to the first story through the window,
as the staircase was too narrow; it could not, therefore, be reckoned
among the possibilities in the way of furniture.

Mademoiselle Baptistine's ambition had been to be able to purchase a set
of drawing-room furniture in yellow Utrecht velvet, stamped with a rose
pattern, and with mahogany in swan's neck style, with a sofa. But this
would have cost five hundred francs at least, and in view of the fact
that she had only been able to lay by forty-two francs and ten sous for
this purpose in the course of five years, she had ended by renouncing
the idea. However, who is there who has attained his ideal?

Nothing is more easy to present to the imagination than the Bishop's
bedchamber. A glazed door opened on the garden; opposite this was the
bed,--a hospital bed of iron, with a canopy of green serge; in the
shadow of the bed, behind a curtain, were the utensils of the toilet,
which still betrayed the elegant habits of the man of the world: there
were two doors, one near the chimney, opening into the oratory; the
other near the bookcase, opening into the dining-room. The bookcase was
a large cupboard with glass doors filled with books; the chimney was of
wood painted to represent marble, and habitually without fire. In the
chimney stood a pair of firedogs of iron, ornamented above with two
garlanded vases, and flutings which had formerly been silvered
with silver leaf, which was a sort of episcopal luxury; above the
chimney-piece hung a crucifix of copper, with the silver worn off, fixed
on a background of threadbare velvet in a wooden frame from which the
gilding had fallen; near the glass door a large table with an inkstand,
loaded with a confusion of papers and with huge volumes; before the
table an arm-chair of straw; in front of the bed a prie-Dieu, borrowed
from the oratory.

Two portraits in oval frames were fastened to the wall on each side of
the bed. Small gilt inscriptions on the plain surface of the cloth at
the side of these figures indicated that the portraits represented,
one the Abbe of Chaliot, bishop of Saint Claude; the other, the Abbe
Tourteau, vicar-general of Agde, abbe of Grand-Champ, order of Citeaux,
diocese of Chartres. When the Bishop succeeded to this apartment, after
the hospital patients, he had found these portraits there, and had left
them. They were priests, and probably donors--two reasons for respecting
them. All that he knew about these two persons was, that they had
been appointed by the king, the one to his bishopric, the other to his
benefice, on the same day, the 27th of April, 1785. Madame Magloire
having taken the pictures down to dust, the Bishop had discovered these
particulars written in whitish ink on a little square of paper, yellowed
by time, and attached to the back of the portrait of the Abbe of
Grand-Champ with four wafers.

At his window he had an antique curtain of a coarse woollen stuff, which
finally became so old, that, in order to avoid the expense of a new one,
Madame Magloire was forced to take a large seam in the very middle
of it. This seam took the form of a cross. The Bishop often called
attention to it: "How delightful that is!" he said.

All the rooms in the house, without exception, those on the ground
floor as well as those on the first floor, were white-washed, which is a
fashion in barracks and hospitals.

However, in their latter years, Madame Magloire discovered beneath the
paper which had been washed over, paintings, ornamenting the apartment
of Mademoiselle Baptistine, as we shall see further on. Before becoming
a hospital, this house had been the ancient parliament house of the
Bourgeois. Hence this decoration. The chambers were paved in red bricks,
which were washed every week, with straw mats in front of all the beds.
Altogether, this dwelling, which was attended to by the two women, was
exquisitely clean from top to bottom. This was the sole luxury which the
Bishop permitted. He said, "That takes nothing from the poor."

It must be confessed, however, that he still retained from his former
possessions six silver knives and forks and a soup-ladle, which
Madame Magloire contemplated every day with delight, as they glistened
splendidly upon the coarse linen cloth. And since we are now painting
the Bishop of D---- as he was in reality, we must add that he had said
more than once, "I find it difficult to renounce eating from silver
dishes."

To this silverware must be added two large candlesticks of massive
silver, which he had inherited from a great-aunt. These candlesticks
held two wax candles, and usually figured on the Bishop's chimney-piece.
When he had any one to dinner, Madame Magloire lighted the two candles
and set the candlesticks on the table.

In the Bishop's own chamber, at the head of his bed, there was a small
cupboard, in which Madame Magloire locked up the six silver knives and
forks and the big spoon every night. But it is necessary to add, that
the key was never removed.

The garden, which had been rather spoiled by the ugly buildings which
we have mentioned, was composed of four alleys in cross-form, radiating
from a tank. Another walk made the circuit of the garden, and skirted
the white wall which enclosed it. These alleys left behind them four
square plots rimmed with box. In three of these, Madame Magloire
cultivated vegetables; in the fourth, the Bishop had planted some
flowers; here and there stood a few fruit-trees. Madame Magloire had
once remarked, with a sort of gentle malice: "Monseigneur, you who turn
everything to account, have, nevertheless, one useless plot. It would be
better to grow salads there than bouquets." "Madame Magloire," retorted
the Bishop, "you are mistaken. The beautiful is as useful as the
useful." He added after a pause, "More so, perhaps."

This plot, consisting of three or four beds, occupied the Bishop
almost as much as did his books. He liked to pass an hour or two there,
trimming, hoeing, and making holes here and there in the earth, into
which he dropped seeds. He was not as hostile to insects as a gardener
could have wished to see him. Moreover, he made no pretensions to
botany; he ignored groups and consistency; he made not the slightest
effort to decide between Tournefort and the natural method; he took part
neither with the buds against the cotyledons, nor with Jussieu against
Linnaeus. He did not study plants; he loved flowers. He respected
learned men greatly; he respected the ignorant still more; and, without
ever failing in these two respects, he watered his flower-beds every
summer evening with a tin watering-pot painted green.

The house had not a single door which could be locked. The door of the
dining-room, which, as we have said, opened directly on the cathedral
square, had formerly been ornamented with locks and bolts like the door
of a prison. The Bishop had had all this ironwork removed, and this door
was never fastened, either by night or by day, with anything except the
latch. All that the first passerby had to do at any hour, was to give it
a push. At first, the two women had been very much tried by this door,
which was never fastened, but Monsieur de D---- had said to them, "Have
bolts put on your rooms, if that will please you." They had ended by
sharing his confidence, or by at least acting as though they shared it.
Madame Magloire alone had frights from time to time. As for the Bishop,
his thought can be found explained, or at least indicated, in the three
lines which he wrote on the margin of a Bible, "This is the shade of
difference: the door of the physician should never be shut, the door of
the priest should always be open."

On another book, entitled Philosophy of the Medical Science, he had
written this other note: "Am not I a physician like them? I also have my
patients, and then, too, I have some whom I call my unfortunates."

Again he wrote: "Do not inquire the name of him who asks a shelter of
you. The very man who is embarrassed by his name is the one who needs
shelter."

It chanced that a worthy cure, I know not whether it was the cure of
Couloubroux or the cure of Pompierry, took it into his head to ask
him one day, probably at the instigation of Madame Magloire, whether
Monsieur was sure that he was not committing an indiscretion, to a
certain extent, in leaving his door unfastened day and night, at the
mercy of any one who should choose to enter, and whether, in short,
he did not fear lest some misfortune might occur in a house so little
guarded. The Bishop touched his shoulder, with gentle gravity, and
said to him, "Nisi Dominus custodierit domum, in vanum vigilant qui
custodiunt eam," Unless the Lord guard the house, in vain do they watch
who guard it.

Then he spoke of something else.

He was fond of saying, "There is a bravery of the priest as well as
the bravery of a colonel of dragoons,--only," he added, "ours must be
tranquil."




CHAPTER VII--CRAVATTE

It is here that a fact falls naturally into place, which we must not
omit, because it is one of the sort which show us best what sort of a
man the Bishop of D---- was.

After the destruction of the band of Gaspard Bes, who had infested the
gorges of Ollioules, one of his lieutenants, Cravatte, took refuge in
the mountains. He concealed himself for some time with his bandits, the
remnant of Gaspard Bes's troop, in the county of Nice; then he made his
way to Piedmont, and suddenly reappeared in France, in the vicinity
of Barcelonette. He was first seen at Jauziers, then at Tuiles. He hid
himself in the caverns of the Joug-de-l'Aigle, and thence he descended
towards the hamlets and villages through the ravines of Ubaye and
Ubayette.

He even pushed as far as Embrun, entered the cathedral one night,
and despoiled the sacristy. His highway robberies laid waste the
country-side. The gendarmes were set on his track, but in vain. He
always escaped; sometimes he resisted by main force. He was a bold
wretch. In the midst of all this terror the Bishop arrived. He was
making his circuit to Chastelar. The mayor came to meet him, and urged
him to retrace his steps. Cravatte was in possession of the mountains
as far as Arche, and beyond; there was danger even with an escort; it
merely exposed three or four unfortunate gendarmes to no purpose.

"Therefore," said the Bishop, "I intend to go without escort."

"You do not really mean that, Monseigneur!" exclaimed the mayor.

"I do mean it so thoroughly that I absolutely refuse any gendarmes, and
shall set out in an hour."

"Set out?"

"Set out."

"Alone?"

"Alone."

"Monseigneur, you will not do that!"

"There exists yonder in the mountains," said the Bishop, "a tiny
community no bigger than that, which I have not seen for three years.
They are my good friends, those gentle and honest shepherds. They own
one goat out of every thirty that they tend. They make very pretty
woollen cords of various colors, and they play the mountain airs on
little flutes with six holes. They need to be told of the good God now
and then. What would they say to a bishop who was afraid? What would
they say if I did not go?"

"But the brigands, Monseigneur?"

"Hold," said the Bishop, "I must think of that. You are right. I may
meet them. They, too, need to be told of the good God."

"But, Monseigneur, there is a band of them! A flock of wolves!"

"Monsieur le maire, it may be that it is of this very flock of wolves
that Jesus has constituted me the shepherd. Who knows the ways of
Providence?"

"They will rob you, Monseigneur."

"I have nothing."

"They will kill you."

"An old goodman of a priest, who passes along mumbling his prayers? Bah!
To what purpose?"

"Oh, mon Dieu! what if you should meet them!"

"I should beg alms of them for my poor."

"Do not go, Monseigneur. In the name of Heaven! You are risking your
life!"

"Monsieur le maire," said the Bishop, "is that really all? I am not in
the world to guard my own life, but to guard souls."

They had to allow him to do as he pleased. He set out, accompanied only
by a child who offered to serve as a guide. His obstinacy was bruited
about the country-side, and caused great consternation.

He would take neither his sister nor Madame Magloire. He traversed the
mountain on mule-back, encountered no one, and arrived safe and sound
at the residence of his "good friends," the shepherds. He remained
there for a fortnight, preaching, administering the sacrament, teaching,
exhorting. When the time of his departure approached, he resolved to
chant a Te Deum pontifically. He mentioned it to the cure. But what was
to be done? There were no episcopal ornaments. They could only place at
his disposal a wretched village sacristy, with a few ancient chasubles
of threadbare damask adorned with imitation lace.

"Bah!" said the Bishop. "Let us announce our Te Deum from the pulpit,
nevertheless, Monsieur le Cure. Things will arrange themselves."

They instituted a search in the churches of the neighborhood. All the
magnificence of these humble parishes combined would not have sufficed
to clothe the chorister of a cathedral properly.

While they were thus embarrassed, a large chest was brought and
deposited in the presbytery for the Bishop, by two unknown horsemen, who
departed on the instant. The chest was opened; it contained a cope of
cloth of gold, a mitre ornamented with diamonds, an archbishop's cross,
a magnificent crosier,--all the pontifical vestments which had been
stolen a month previously from the treasury of Notre Dame d'Embrun. In
the chest was a paper, on which these words were written, "From Cravatte
to Monseigneur Bienvenu."

"Did not I say that things would come right of themselves?" said the
Bishop. Then he added, with a smile, "To him who contents himself with
the surplice of a curate, God sends the cope of an archbishop."

"Monseigneur," murmured the cure, throwing back his head with a smile.
"God--or the Devil."

The Bishop looked steadily at the cure, and repeated with authority,
"God!"

When he returned to Chastelar, the people came out to stare at him as at
a curiosity, all along the road. At the priest's house in Chastelar he
rejoined Mademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire, who were waiting
for him, and he said to his sister: "Well! was I in the right? The poor
priest went to his poor mountaineers with empty hands, and he returns
from them with his hands full. I set out bearing only my faith in God; I
have brought back the treasure of a cathedral."

That evening, before he went to bed, he said again: "Let us never fear
robbers nor murderers. Those are dangers from without, petty dangers.
Let us fear ourselves. Prejudices are the real robbers; vices are the
real murderers. The great dangers lie within ourselves. What matters it
what threatens our head or our purse! Let us think only of that which
threatens our soul."

Then, turning to his sister: "Sister, never a precaution on the part
of the priest, against his fellow-man. That which his fellow does, God
permits. Let us confine ourselves to prayer, when we think that a danger
is approaching us. Let us pray, not for ourselves, but that our brother
may not fall into sin on our account."

However, such incidents were rare in his life. We relate those of which
we know; but generally he passed his life in doing the same things at
the same moment. One month of his year resembled one hour of his day.

As to what became of "the treasure" of the cathedral of Embrun, we
should be embarrassed by any inquiry in that direction. It consisted of
very handsome things, very tempting things, and things which were very
well adapted to be stolen for the benefit of the unfortunate. Stolen
they had already been elsewhere. Half of the adventure was completed; it
only remained to impart a new direction to the theft, and to cause it
to take a short trip in the direction of the poor. However, we make no
assertions on this point. Only, a rather obscure note was found among
the Bishop's papers, which may bear some relation to this matter, and
which is couched in these terms, "The question is, to decide whether
this should be turned over to the cathedral or to the hospital."




CHAPTER VIII--PHILOSOPHY AFTER DRINKING

The senator above mentioned was a clever man, who had made his own way,
heedless of those things which present obstacles, and which are called
conscience, sworn faith, justice, duty: he had marched straight to his
goal, without once flinching in the line of his advancement and his
interest. He was an old attorney, softened by success; not a bad man by
any means, who rendered all the small services in his power to his sons,
his sons-in-law, his relations, and even to his friends, having wisely
seized upon, in life, good sides, good opportunities, good windfalls.
Everything else seemed to him very stupid. He was intelligent, and just
sufficiently educated to think himself a disciple of Epicurus; while he
was, in reality, only a product of Pigault-Lebrun. He laughed willingly
and pleasantly over infinite and eternal things, and at the "Crotchets
of that good old fellow the Bishop." He even sometimes laughed at him
with an amiable authority in the presence of M. Myriel himself, who
listened to him.

On some semi-official occasion or other, I do not recollect what,
Count*** [this senator] and M. Myriel were to dine with the prefect.
At dessert, the senator, who was slightly exhilarated, though still
perfectly dignified, exclaimed:--

"Egad, Bishop, let's have a discussion. It is hard for a senator and a
bishop to look at each other without winking. We are two augurs. I am
going to make a confession to you. I have a philosophy of my own."

"And you are right," replied the Bishop. "As one makes one's philosophy,
so one lies on it. You are on the bed of purple, senator."

The senator was encouraged, and went on:--

"Let us be good fellows."

"Good devils even," said the Bishop.

"I declare to you," continued the senator, "that the Marquis d'Argens,
Pyrrhon, Hobbes, and M. Naigeon are no rascals. I have all the
philosophers in my library gilded on the edges."

"Like yourself, Count," interposed the Bishop.

The senator resumed:--

"I hate Diderot; he is an ideologist, a declaimer, and a revolutionist,
a believer in God at bottom, and more bigoted than Voltaire. Voltaire
made sport of Needham, and he was wrong, for Needham's eels prove that
God is useless. A drop of vinegar in a spoonful of flour paste supplies
the fiat lux. Suppose the drop to be larger and the spoonful bigger;
you have the world. Man is the eel. Then what is the good of the Eternal
Father? The Jehovah hypothesis tires me, Bishop. It is good for nothing
but to produce shallow people, whose reasoning is hollow. Down with that
great All, which torments me! Hurrah for Zero which leaves me in peace!
Between you and me, and in order to empty my sack, and make confession
to my pastor, as it behooves me to do, I will admit to you that I
have good sense. I am not enthusiastic over your Jesus, who preaches
renunciation and sacrifice to the last extremity. 'Tis the counsel of an
avaricious man to beggars. Renunciation; why? Sacrifice; to what end?
I do not see one wolf immolating himself for the happiness of another
wolf. Let us stick to nature, then. We are at the top; let us have a
superior philosophy. What is the advantage of being at the top, if
one sees no further than the end of other people's noses? Let us live
merrily. Life is all. That man has another future elsewhere, on high,
below, anywhere, I don't believe; not one single word of it. Ah!
sacrifice and renunciation are recommended to me; I must take heed to
everything I do; I must cudgel my brains over good and evil, over the
just and the unjust, over the fas and the nefas. Why? Because I shall
have to render an account of my actions. When? After death. What a fine
dream! After my death it will be a very clever person who can catch me.
Have a handful of dust seized by a shadow-hand, if you can. Let us tell
the truth, we who are initiated, and who have raised the veil of Isis:
there is no such thing as either good or evil; there is vegetation.
Let us seek the real. Let us get to the bottom of it. Let us go into it
thoroughly. What the deuce! let us go to the bottom of it! We must scent
out the truth; dig in the earth for it, and seize it. Then it gives you
exquisite joys. Then you grow strong, and you laugh. I am square on the
bottom, I am. Immortality, Bishop, is a chance, a waiting for dead men's
shoes. Ah! what a charming promise! trust to it, if you like! What a
fine lot Adam has! We are souls, and we shall be angels, with blue wings
on our shoulder-blades. Do come to my assistance: is it not Tertullian
who says that the blessed shall travel from star to star? Very well. We
shall be the grasshoppers of the stars. And then, besides, we shall
see God. Ta, ta, ta! What twaddle all these paradises are! God is a
nonsensical monster. I would not say that in the Moniteur, egad! but I
may whisper it among friends. Inter pocula. To sacrifice the world to
paradise is to let slip the prey for the shadow. Be the dupe of the
infinite! I'm not such a fool. I am a nought. I call myself Monsieur le
Comte Nought, senator. Did I exist before my birth? No. Shall I exist
after death? No. What am I? A little dust collected in an organism. What
am I to do on this earth? The choice rests with me: suffer or enjoy.
Whither will suffering lead me? To nothingness; but I shall have
suffered. Whither will enjoyment lead me? To nothingness; but I shall
have enjoyed myself. My choice is made. One must eat or be eaten. I
shall eat. It is better to be the tooth than the grass. Such is my
wisdom. After which, go whither I push thee, the grave-digger is there;
the Pantheon for some of us: all falls into the great hole. End. Finis.
Total liquidation. This is the vanishing-point. Death is death, believe
me. I laugh at the idea of there being any one who has anything to tell
me on that subject. Fables of nurses; bugaboo for children; Jehovah for
men. No; our to-morrow is the night. Beyond the tomb there is nothing
but equal nothingness. You have been Sardanapalus, you have been Vincent
de Paul--it makes no difference. That is the truth. Then live your life,
above all things. Make use of your _I_ while you have it. In truth,
Bishop, I tell you that I have a philosophy of my own, and I have my
philosophers. I don't let myself be taken in with that nonsense.
Of course, there must be something for those who are down,--for the
barefooted beggars, knife-grinders, and miserable wretches. Legends,
chimeras, the soul, immortality, paradise, the stars, are provided for
them to swallow. They gobble it down. They spread it on their dry bread.
He who has nothing else has the good. God. That is the least he can
have. I oppose no objection to that; but I reserve Monsieur Naigeon for
myself. The good God is good for the populace."

The Bishop clapped his hands.

"That's talking!" he exclaimed. "What an excellent and really marvellous
thing is this materialism! Not every one who wants it can have it. Ah!
when one does have it, one is no longer a dupe, one does not stupidly
allow one's self to be exiled like Cato, nor stoned like Stephen, nor
burned alive like Jeanne d'Arc. Those who have succeeded in procuring
this admirable materialism have the joy of feeling themselves
irresponsible, and of thinking that they can devour everything without